Gentlemen: I have come to Washington to appear before you in order to urge you most strongly to raise to a realistic level the present entirely inadequate minimum wage in the textile industry . . . and also that you shall continue to set the minimum wage on a national, rather than a regional, basis.

During the past year the mills and workers of our textile centers in Massachusetts have suffered grievously.

Between March, 1951 and April, 1952, the number of jobs in broad woven fabric mills in all New England declined by over 37 percent. In Fall River and New Bedford, two of our great mill cities, the decline was over 26 percent.

This is four times the rate of decline in textile employment in any other state of the union. While the figure for New England as a whole is more than 8 times the drop in the rest of the textile manufacturing states.

In most New England mills the effective minimum as set by union contract is somewhere between $1.09½ and $1.10 cents an hour. So the present 87 cent minimum set under the Walsh-Healey Act is meaningless.

Among our southern competitors, however, we have a different picture. According to recent figures of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 14.4 percent of southern production workers in textiles are in the $1.00 to $1.05 wage bracket – 3.6 percent were receiving only 89 cents – and 3.5 percent only 87 cents.

I do not have to point out to you that an 87 cent hourly rate which means a weekly paycheck of $34.80 cents a week, presuming a 40-hour week, is not a living wage today in our inflated economy.

The Walsh-Healey Act was designed with one all-important purpose – to prevent unscrupulous employers from taking Government business through the exploitation of labor.

I maintain that a minimum wage which allows a weekly wage of $34.80 for a 40-hour week – or $29.50 for the 34-hour week which has prevailed in the short weeks of many textile mills this spring and summer – is exploitation!

No man can bring up a family today on $29.50 a week, which is little more than $15 a week measured in 1939 prices. And I submit to you that it is just as inequitable to continue a minimum wage which is effective in parts of the South, and entirely ineffective in the North, due to our union contracts, as it was thirty years ago to allow the sweat shops of a less enlightened era to take the bread from responsible firms' mouths by unprincipled exploitation of workers.

Someday wages in the North and the South will be equalized. Then we shall compete, not by lowering labor costs, but by our production skills and merchandising techniques. That will be a happier and more equitable day for mill owner and worker alike. And that day will be brought measurably closer by this, the first step, raising the present 87 cents to a more realistic, and more humane, figure.

But equally important – indeed perhaps more important – is that the minimum wage in the textile industry should be fixed on a national and not a regional or local basis.

In the first place the textile industry is a national industry. Textiles are manufactured in many states, but goods are sold through one, and only one market – New York.

I know of no other industry with such a national market where the minimum wage is not established nationally. In steel, cement, and paints and varnish, where the minimum does vary... there is no national market. Steel made in Birmingham is sold in adjacent markets, and so on. These are industries where freight is a decisive factor, which is not so of textiles. And even in these industries the actual wage differential is already narrowing. In steel, for instance, it was formerly 10 cents but the new steel contracts set the differential at only 5 cents an hour.

The fact is that setting of different regional minimums in textiles would spell the inevitable end of Walsh-Healey, which is a law with a long and honorable record . . . a record it should be noted in which textiles have played a leading role.

The Act has been in force for 16 years, and billions of dollars worth of goods have been bought under its just provisions by the Government . . . to be precise about $200,000,000,000 worth of goods I am told.

In peace and war alike the Walsh-Healey Act has served us well, protecting worker and legitimate manufacturer alike . . . and, as I have said before, the textile industry was always the leader in administering the practice and formulating the philosophy of the law.

Furthermore, industry and labor have in the past stood shoulder to shoulder in favor of adequate minimum wage . . . just as labor and industry are, at least in my native Massachusetts, standing shoulder to shoulder now.

The first committee set up under the Fair Labor Standards Act was a textile committee . . . and it set a national minimum wage of 32½ cents back in 1939 . . . a procedure which had both labor and industry support. In 1941 the minimum, I understand, was raised to 37½ cents . . . and in 1942 to 40 cents again with management and labor both going along.

I think we are face to face here with a principle that goes even beyond the interest which we in Massachusetts have in the issue . . . the principle which gave birth to Walsh-Healey, and the entire philosophy of a nationally-set minimum wage level in industry.

What after all is our broad purpose in this sort of legislation? Is it not two-fold? First, to assure that no unprincipled manufacturer will be able to underbid his more legitimate competitors on government procurement . . . through the payment of substandard wages.

And, second, is it not to put into effective legislation which will gradually equalize labor costs, as well as living standards, as between different sections of the country.

Competition is the soul of American business . . . but competition through the display of manufacturing and merchandising skills.

When competition is based on a lower wage rate . . . or a wage differential . . . it is degrading to both worker and mill owner alike. It is un-American in the finest sense.

We should be working towards equalizing wages, not increasing present differentials.

And again I point out to you that the textile industry which has been the leader in the past, may continue to so act.

Let us be sure that it leads us towards a gradual ironing out of present differentials . . . not towards a deepening of an injustice that already exists.

New England has suffered grievously in the past as lower wage areas have ruthlessly cut into her markets. We in Massachusetts have paid a high price for our belief that the worker was entitled to a decent standard of living in our mill towns.

We do not regret that price. But we do not want to have to pay again, now, by having a wage differential forged around our neck.

We do not regret the higher wages we pay in Massachusetts. Indeed, we are proud of them. But we do not want to see the differential frozen.

What we would like to think, actually, is that wages in other parts of the country will gradually rise until they equal ours.